Blog post on "The World of Digital Marketing"

The world of digital marketing

Digital marketing. 
The word that makes you instinctively think of an art of applying using intense tools involving research, algorithms, paid ads, SEO and such fancy terms. 
However, digital marketing can actually be quite simple, and refined. 
Digital marketing is essentially applying marketing strategies through a digital medium that utilizes internet and online based digital technologies. 
It could be something as simple as promoting your brand over email to your potential customers via an email list, or using text and multimedia channels.

There are many specialisations in using digital marketing, which are determined by the medium of interaction used. The most commonly used types of digital marketing methods are –
1. Social Media Marketing – Most people often confuse marketing on social media channels to be the sole form of digital marketing. While it may be the most widely used one, social media marketing is essentially one of the tools of digital marketing which aims to drive traffic, build awareness and engage your audiences- both current and potential, over social media platforms. Due to its wide appeal, social media marketing is steadily gaining popularity, with popular platforms like Instagram, Facebook and LinkedIn being some of the top choices for brands. On an average, 49% of the world are on social media regardless of age. 
2. Content Marketing – Content is king. This is an age old adage, which still holds true. In today’s time, if your brand is not providing customers any valuable content, then they will be less inclined to favouring your business, or its products and services. Content marketing is not limited to text based information such as blogs, website write ups, or articles but is much more than that. Content marketing includes creating stunning infographics, SEO optimised webpages, podcasts, and even videos. The most interesting aspect that makes content marketing a go to strategy for any digital marketers is the fact that content can be curated and tailored to suit specific target audiences, but incorporating keywords and rich text based content. Content marketing can be one of the simplest and most effective means of communication, provided you know what you are communicating.
3. Search Engine Optimisation (SEO) – If you ever type in something in Google’s search bar and hit enter, you will get over millions of responses in the fraction of a second. But what matters, is the websites that appear first at the top of the page, organically. That is the power of search engine optimisation. Search is primarily the most used means for driving traffics to brands. As compared to other means of marketing, search engine optimisation ranks higher since it helps you target keywords which your potential consumers or users were actively searching for. Search engine optimisation is divided into two categories – organic search and paid search. SEO also involves analysing and modifying on-page and off-page factors that affect your page rankings. A lot of companies rely heavily on search engine optimisation as a method of increasing their click-through-rates and in turn their sales, which speaks volumes about its importance as a valuable tool to digital marketers.
4. Search Engine Marketing- Once you have identified how search engine optimisation works, it is easier to implement the same into your marketing strategy using search engine marketing. It is a commonly used digital marketing strategy used to increase your page’s visibility, and it’s ranking in search engine result pages. The key difference between search engine optimisation and search engine marketing is that while SEO is organic, SEM is paid. Search engine marketing assists a firm in investing their marketing efforts in a format and to an audience who are likely to be their potential customers. SEM is also feasible for the company, since they pay only for the impressions that result in visitors that drive their traffic. This conversion in turn also helps boost the website’s ranking in organic search results, which serves as an added advantage to the business. Thus, if implemented correctly, search engine marketing can be one of the most advantageous tools for a company.
5. Pay Per Click (PPC) – PPC is a model where advertisers pay only when a user clicks on any of their ads displayed. The key component of PPC is that the advertisers has to pay the fee solely based on the number of clients or customers that click on the page. These ads appear when people search for things online using a search engine like Google – especially when they are performing commercial searches. These also include banner ads that are commonly displayed on websites, and remarketing.  In order to successfully implement pay per click campaign, you need to choose your keywords correctly, and bid for them in the ad auction which in turn helps the search engine determine the relevance and validity of advertisements that appear on search engine result pages. Choosing the relevant and appropriate keywords plays a key role in pay per click advertising.
6. Email Marketing- Since the emergence of the internet, email marketing has played a crucial role in helping businesses build and establish their digital presence. While email was earlier used only as a tool of communication, it has since then evolved in use and has become a powerful tool for marketers. Email marketing involves sending commercial messages to potential or current customers. It is a very effective tool to provide a personalised touch to your business’ communication which is most often lacking in other means of digital marketing. Building a specially curated emailing list often proves useful to a business than sending bulk cold emails to potential clients and customers.
7. Digital Radio – While radio advertising might be traditional concept, digital radio is a relatively new entrant in the field of digital marketing. You have probably already encountered examples of digital radio advertising while using apps such as spotify, saavn, gaana or similar apps. It is quite likely that you are humming an ad jingle or a catchy and memorable tune created by a company that you unknowingly picked up while listening to their digital ads. And that shows the subtle impact that radio advertising unknowingly has on us. An added advantage that digital radio advertising has is that it utilises a lot of information that it obtains from users such as musical preferences, artists preferences, time of the day, day of the week you listen to music, as well as custom playlists. With this abundance of information in the hands of digital music streaming platforms, it is no surprise that digital radio advertising is an up and coming option for marketers.
8. Mobile marketing – Smartphones have revolutionised the way we access and process information. From access to numerous websites at the click of a button, to utility based apps that serve a variety of features, they assist us with a variety of functions. With roughly 3.8 billion smartphone users across the world, making up for 48.33% of the population, it is no surprise that marketers have capitalised this digital market space. Mobile marketing covers a large target audience ranging from people in the age group of 7 to 90. In the current scenario of a pandemic, consumers spend close to 70% of their time using their mobile phones, so as a brand, if your audiences are on mobile phones, that’s where you should be too!

All in all, digital marketing is a diverse domain, and offers a variety of tools that can help sustain and complement traditional advertising. In today’s times, a business that is not online in some form or the other, is as good as non-existent. In order to utilise the digital domain to your best, it is essential to identify which method can help you attract, retain and increase your audience.

